---
bibliography: bibliography.bib
title: Temp Title
author: Ethan Robison
date: \today
---

# Introduction

Games which attempt to simulate a set of physical or social processes
must inevitably make some sacrifice with respect to the particulars of
those processes. They cannot perfectly simulate every minute physical
law or macroeconomic pattern that we as humans populating the real world
may or may not understand. There are limitations to the fidelity of the
simulation.

These limitations mean that certain aspects central to the simulation,
or tangential to it, must be excluded from the interactivity. If no
simulation can perfectly capture the real world, what it captures must
be at best a subset of it, implying that certain things are left behind
or overlooked or elided.

These elisions, implicitly or explicitly chosen by the creators of these
simulations, themselves capture the values of the software as a text,
just as the parts that are included contribute to these sets of values.
We can, and should, read as many values judgements out of the decision
to exclude some particularly salient aspect of the "real world" from a
simulation of it.

We present an unpacking of a variety of military "games" and pieces of
simulation software, and a deliberate reading into of the particulars of
warfare that are missing from those artifacts. We argue that the
mechanics of these games are representative of the hegemony of the
military-entertainment complex [CITE Gameplay Mode?], despite the
oft-stated goal of their creators of creating holistic training
mechanisms for the soldiers of tomorrow.

In particular, we examine a few pieces of software created by or for the
benefit of the U.S. military: [TODO], [TODO], [TODO]. Each claims to
capture some of the particulars of being a member of the military,
although we will argue that each falls short of its ostensibly holistic
nature and instead perpetuates certain ideas and ideals about what it
means to be an active participant in a theater of war, while
conveniently or inadvertantly ignoring other aspects.

In particular, we highlight those other aspects which these pieces of
software do not cover or represent adequately, namely that which is:

1. Gruesome
2. Mundane
3. Bureaucratic
4. Interpersonal

Each of these, we will argue, represents an aspect of warfare or
military life which for a variety of reasons does not translate well
into gameplay. These reasons could be based on a technical,
entertainment, or ethical foundation.

On the other hand, we also emphasize that these pieces of software in
fact do an adequate job of providing teaching for certain, specific
values which are in line with the ultimate goals of the U.S. military as
understood in a general sense, namely:

1. High recruitment numbers
2. Strong intra- and inter-unit coordination and performance
3. Limited legal liability

Finally, we unpack the values that these values themselves represent.
That is, the overarching goals that are captured by the existence of
these texts, which embody certain values that the U.S. military holds.
Then, we will highlight the ways in which a military, despite its
ostensible membership in a games creation community, represents a vastly
different set of interests than typical game developers.

# Games as Incomplete Representations

Games which aim to simulate some aspect of a world, real or imagined,
represent happenstances through their mechanics and structure.
Ultimately, we play them to have experiences that are similar to ours,
but through a different lens; or to have experiences wholly unlike our
own lives. That is, we are unlikely to play games which capture our own
lived experiences unless they can shed new light on them (if one wants
to do otherwise, they could just go forth and live their own life).

However, the complexity of the world, real or imagined, means that a
perfect representation of its processes is out of reach, technically
speaking. Traditional computation does not afford us the mechanisms by
which we might capture, say, Dow Jones here in the real world; nor the
simulated economy of the world of Nirn, home of the Elder Scrolls series
of games [CITE]. Nor can we capture the physical processes of any world
correctly or completely. The good news is that, historically speaking,
it has rarely been beneficial to provide ultra-high fidelity simulations
of existence within the world of video games. Though classic
understandings of computers as powerful engines of arithmetic may have
bamboozled mathematicians into thinking they would be able to simulate
the weather to the n-th degree, the entertainment industry opted for
simulacra of particular processes in lieu of technical correctness.

This juxtaposition, that of an insurmountable barrier and its
workaround, is important: it means that games (really, all software)
that hopes to represent reality (real or fantastical) is simultaneously
forced to live with inaccuracies and perfectly happy to do so. For
entertainment's sake, it is rarely worthwhile to capture the entirety of
the details germane to a particular series of
occurences.\footnote{You'll never see James Bond brush his teeth.}

The fact that games are incomplete representations implies that certain
aspects of the simulated abstract space are necessarily excluded. The
question of what should and should not be included is answered at best
only partially deliberately: a group of creators cannot perfectly reason
about what they are and are not including. Nevertheless, there are
values to be read into which parts of reality make it into the
simulation as mechanics and systems within the ludology.

This idea is related to, indeed descended from, the argument made by
Flannigan and Nissenbaum [CITE] with respect inevitable capturing of
values by works, including video games. Here we expand on this thesis,
and highlight that there are certain systems, certain logics of behavior
[CITE Wardrip-Fruin?] that a developer might implement, and certain that
they may not. Note that of the set of processes that we understand about
a world, some of these must be excluded from a simulation. Critically,
we can read as many values out of the parts of reality that are left out
of a simulation as the parts that are.

We investigate the excluded aspects of reality that are wrapped up in
military games and other interactive artifacts. Especially, we unpack
the differences between the implied values of these software---as
marketed, as perceived, as used, and as members of the broad ontological
category of "game". We examine these conflicts in the context of the
military-entertainment complex [CITE?], itself controversial with
respect to the age-old question of what is fun.

[TODO mention the history of entertainment as it stems from military
research? See Gameplay mode.]

# Values at Play in Military Games

1. High recruitment numbers
2. Strong intra- and inter-unit coordination and performance
3. Limited legal liability

What, then, are the values wrapped up in these games?

First and foremost, the glorifying of war. There is implicit in a game
that takes an uncritical stance on war that war is alright. While lots
of subject matter can be approached neutrally, it is difficult to
imagine a game about large-scale armed conflict that does not, one way
or the other, take a stand. To be frank, we consider all stances to be
deliberate pushbacks against the dominant hegemony or not. While it is
possible to be neutral about certain aspects of one's game, the central
narrative conceit (such as being a soldier in the military) is not
afforded such leeway. If it is the foundation of the game, then there is
a values judgement embedded in it. In this case, being uncritical of a
particular central element is in fact an endorsement.

# Part 3

In fact, these games are often guilty of bauderlerizing war. Enemies die
in a single hit, and their corpses are conveniently garbage-collected by
background processes when the player moves to another part of the map.
One particularly salient quote:

> The miracle of Zekistan is that its streets are deserted and houses
> empty, apart from the ubiquitous Tangos (who all die instantaneously
> when hit). Air and artillery strikes do not hit wedding parties. There
> is no collateral damage. War is peace. [Cite Banal War 113]

There are no games that unpack the gore of armed conflict (those who are
wounded in action), or the boredom (hurry up and wait), or the
moment-to-moment socializing that happens whenever a large group of
people gather together. There is no collateral damage, unless it is part
of a scripted sequence. There is no refugee crisis. There is no holding
your squad mate's head up as he bleeds out from a shrapnel wound
(unless, of course, it is part of a scripted sequence). And, naturally,
there should not be. These artifacts are ultimately games, and this
means skipping out on certain pieces of real life. [TODO cite War Play
comment on not simulating explosions] We have already discussed the
reasons _not_ to simulate every minute detail within a simulation. It is
not unreasonable, from a technical or narrative perspective, for the
creators of these games to exclude many of these aspects of war. There
is not a good pedagogical or mechanical reason to do so. However, we
reiterate that in choosing to exclude these mechanics, the developers
are making a values statement about the kinds of things they _do_ want
to use to characterize war. 

This makes a stark contrast to the stated and implied goals of most of
this software: as training or recruitment tools for the military.
However, we have seen that these games do not provide a comprehensive
experience of the military experience: they provide a deliberately
crafted subset of it. So it cannot be that they are tools for preparing
soldiers to be soldiers top to bottom. It can only be that they are
tools for preparing soldiers to be soldiers as the US military wants
them to be, or for preparing civilians to be soldiers at the end of the
day.

1. Gruesome
2. Mundane
3. Bureaucratic
4. Interpersonal

Since a game cannot perfectly capture the totality of the experience
that it is attempting to provide, we must examine the parts which get
pruned (for they are as informative as the parts which are included).

We ask: do the pieces of the game which made it into the final cut
represent the values as stated by the game's creators? Are these pieces
in line with the values as we typically understand them, vis-a-vis those
processes?

For example, if we spend monnneeeyyy [TODO how much???] to make a game to
teach sexual assault sensitivity to officers, but that game is
ultimately a dialog tree with expensive voice acting and animation, and
completely excludes role play with humans, what have we said? [CITE the
thing from ICT].

Ultimately, we must ask what values we normally project onto the verbs
that the game affords. Is the verb "say", or "soothe", or "shoot"?

# Part 4

> But because of the congruence requirement in gaming, if one is a
> realist game designer, the challenge is not only to capture the social
> realities of the disenfranchised but also to inject the game back into
> the correct social milieu of available players where it rings true.
> (84)

Since these are values wrapped up in the games that the military
produces and endorses, we should examine what those values themselves
say. Unsurprisingly, they suggest ideas that are in line with the
military in general: troops should be well-equipped to win wars,
whatever that means. Does that mean they should have squad tactics
ironed out? Yes. Does it mean that they should have the ability to
handle internal, bureaucratic issues? Yes. And, of course, does it mean
that we, as a military institution, should have a never-ending supply of
partially brainwashed individuals willing and able to serve in the
military? Yes, yes, yes.

Likely the most frustrating part of these circumstances, from the
perspective of the games world, is how outside of games these results
ultimately are. Serious games---games whose purpose is not entertainment
but legitimate training for some external scenario, such as complicated
medical surgery---are hard-core simulations of the real-world, and their
purpose is rarely "fun". However, they are designed to expand their
player's understanding and proficiency within a particular context, and
that context is free to be mixed and matched with any other political
situation. That is, learning open heart surgery through a serious game
does not preclude one's involvement in a leftist revolutionary regime,
for instance. By contrast, games produced by the military, for the
benefit of the military, are difficult to read as anything but
shoe-horning their players into a particular mindset. There is little
room for broader interpretation on the part of the player of the
messages of these games.

This shoe-horning is especially frustrating when one considers the
purposes of games as entertainment artifacts: they are designed as an
art form which shows their player(s) an experience. If that is already
their lived experience, then hopefully it shows it to them from a
perspective they did not already understand (that is, it deepens their
understanding of themselves). If the experience is outside of their
lived experience (either by being impossible, or by being perfectly
quotidian and yet unknown to the player), then it will broaden their
understanding of the world.\footnote{Admitedly, many games do not
provide players with "experiences"---they may well be to pass the time
or provide a backdrop for competition. Here we are talking specifically
about the broad category of games whose purpose is to be delivery
mechanisms for an experience. [USE]}

For games which do deliver an experience, it is inevitable that we see
them as situated in the broader capitalist context in which the modern
world rests [CITE something?]. That is, there are no commercial games
without ulterior motives as tools for a capitalist
regime.\footnote{Though we do not hold capitalism in high regard, it is
worth noting that this is not unique to capitalism. Artifacts which
abide by the rules of the system in which they are situated are at least
in part complicit in this system, good or bad.}

A full-spectrum (nice) training simulator would, ostensibly, capture the
full spectrum of war. However, we have seen that this is not, and could
never be, the case. That is, the ostensibly holistic training program
wrapped up in this game is in fact only part of a larger, more
substantive training regime. Then we must ask which parts are being
chosen for inclusion, and which parts are being deliberately excluded
or---conveniently---elided. We see that the gruesome details are left
behind. So, too, are the elements which might contextualize the actions
of the so-called enemy.\footnote{After all, though we do not endorse the
decisions of any of these militant sides, US or otherwise, it is
presumably not a random number generator which is making decisions. In
other words, someone is justifying this war to themselves, by some means
or another. No one is doing this for the heck of it.} There is no
cultural simulation, no macroeconomic spreadsheet that determines what
the local price of produce is, nothing of the sort.

This is ultimately due to the fact that the goal of the "game" is to
provide a particular kind of experience, and the local culture is not
germane to that experience.\footnote{Interestingly, these sorts of
details are relevant to special forces (like, the real ones, not the
video game ones) and to civil affairs soldiers. Their jobs involve
providing stability and in liasing between the US military and locals.}
In other words, the US military is perfectly aware that games like [TODO
which game here?] do not provide proper training on how to "handle"
locals.\footnote{There are, of course, efforts. See, for example, the
work of [CITE Dill paper].} Instead, these more complicated and
less-easily-gamified experiences are wrapped up in role play drills and
other human-human training.

If the complicated training is left to humans to provide, what then, of
the "game" of training? We have already seen that this game provides far
less than the auspicious "perfect experience" [TODO find amusing, biting
quote here] of what warfare is like. Furthermore, we should consider the
position of these sorts of games as capital-G "Games". That is, though
it is a hackneyed question to ask, we should consider whether these
digital artifacts count as games. On the one hand, they seem to satisfy
the normative definitions of games with respect to play. People talk
about them as though they are games. They are marketed as such.

The problem arises with the motives behind the development of the games
in the first place. Ultimately, since the purpose of these pieces of
software is to better increase the army's effectiveness,\footnote{By
"effectiveness", we do not mean in terms of negotiations among US
soldiers and locals---we have already seen that these games do not touch
on the complicated social interactions between the military and its
targets---instead, we mean in terms of "neutralizing threats." This
effectiveness can come in the form of squad tactics practice [TODO cite
that one game], avoiding bureaucratic troubles [TODO reference sexual
assault training for officers], or merely providing warm bodies for the
army [TODO cite America's Army].} we should call into question whether
we, as community members, want to award these the title of "game". 

# Conclusion

Ultimately, it is a question of how these games get made, and for whom.
We hope that in a society such as ours, we can safely reflect on the
fact that the military does some deeply problematic stuff, and still
acknowledge that games are cool. Yet we must rely on our own
sensibilities with respect to what counts as a game made for our
benefit, and one which serves the military machine.

# Bibliography
